
Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 26068-h.htm or 26068-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/0/6/26068/26068-h/26068-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/0/6/26068/26068-h.zip)





THE BATH TATTING BOOK.

by

P. P.







Price One Shilling.

London:
Emily Faithfull,
_Printer and Publisher in Ordinary to Her Majesty_,
83A Farringdon Street, And 14 Princes Street,
Hanover Square.
1865.

[Illustration]




TERMS AND DIRECTIONS.


      _A Loop_, written L; 2 _Loops_, written 2 L, and so on.

      _Single stitches_--Are formed in two ways: First, by
         letting the thread of the shuttle with which you
         are working fall over the back of the hand and
         pushing the shuttle from you. Secondly, by letting
         the thread of the shuttle with which you are
         working fall over the palm of the hand, and putting
         the shuttle through _towards_ you. These two
         stitches worked together alternately make a _Double
         stitch_. But if the second be worked first and the
         first second, alternately, it makes a _Reversed
         Double_. This is used for the purpose of making all
         the work have a right and wrong side.

     _2 Threads_--When 2 threads are used, twist the one
         with which the stitches are to be made round the
         little finger, and proceed as above.

     _Double stitch_, written D; 2 _Double stitches_,
         written 2 D, &c.

     _Reversed Double stitch_, written R D; 2 _Reversed
         Double stitches_, written 2 R D, &c.

     _Loops_--Are made by putting the thread with which
         double stitches are made over a pin, and there must
         be _one_ or more _Double stitches_ between each
         loop. By holding the pin point towards the right
         hand, between the forefinger and thumb of the left,
         the thread can be lifted over by the 2nd finger of
         the right hand, and many loops made without
         removing it. With reversed double stitches, the
         thread is lifted over by the shuttle as the 2nd
         stitch is being made. Loops can also be made by
         putting the shuttle thread over the pin.

     _Ovals_--Form the cotton of the shuttle you are
         directed to work with into a loop round the hand,
         and begin working the stitches. If composed of
         double stitches only (with perhaps one loop in the
         centre), it is called a _plain oval_. If of several
         loops, a _looped oval_.

     _A Join_--Is always made by drawing the thread with
         which the stitches are worked through the specified
         loop or space, and passing the shuttle through the
         loop formed by the thread thus drawn through,
         making it equal in length to an ordinary loop. To
         make a join, 2 threads or an oval are necessary.

     _To Tie_--This is done by drawing the thread on the
         shuttle with which you are working through the
         specified loop or space (or round some thread), and
         putting the same shuttle through the loop so
         formed, always drawing it _quite_ tight. It may
         sometimes be necessary to do this with the other
         thread; but it is done in the same way, with _one_
         thread _only_, and always drawn quite tight.

     _To Attach_--Proceed as in tying--only pass the shuttle
         round the _second thread_ before putting it through
         the loop, and drawing tight. This ties in the
         _second thread_, which cannot be so securely done
         by ordinary joining.




FIRST DOYLEY.


_Raised Cornflower for the First Doyley. Ardern's crochet cotton No. 8
and Pin No. 2._

_1st Row._ Begin an oval, work 2 D (L, 2 D 8 times) draw up, but not
quite close. Begin another oval, at a short distance from the last, 2 D
join to the last L of 1st oval, 2 D (L, 2 D 7 times) draw up, and work 3
more similar ovals.

_2nd Row._ Turn the work down. Tie to the foundation of the last oval.
Begin an oval 2 R D (L, 2 R D 6 times) draw up, not quite close. Tie to
the foundation of the next oval. Begin another oval, 2 R D join to the
last L of the last oval, 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5 times) draw up. Tie to the
foundation of the next oval, and work 2 more similar ovals.

_3rd Row._ Turn the work up. Tie to the foundation of the last oval of
the 2nd Row. Begin an oval, 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) draw up. Tie to the
foundation of the next oval, and work 2 more similar ovals.

_4th Row._ _Plain ovals._ Turn the work down. Tie to the foundation of
the last oval of the 3rd Row. Begin an oval, 9 D, L, 9 D draw close; tie
to the foundation of the same, oval as before. Repeat, tying to the
remaining 2 ovals of 3rd Row.

Then tie to the thread between the last oval of the 2nd Row and the 1st
of the 3rd. Tie the threads together and fasten off.

_5th Row._ _Fill the figured shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head, No. 18._
Pass this cotton through the L of the 1st oval of 4th Row, until about
1/2 a yard is through; twist this thread round the little finger and
work 1 D (L, 1 D 4 times), tie to the L of the 2nd oval of 4th Row. (L,
1 D 5 times) tie to the L of the 3rd oval--fasten off. Six corn-flowers
are required for this Doyley.


_Centre-piece of the 1st Doyley._

_Fill both shuttles. The plain with No. 8. The figured with No. 18. Pin
No. 2._

Tie these cottons together, and with the plain shuttle thread round the
little finger work 6 D. Begin an oval with the figured shuttle, 2 R D.
(L, 2 R D 9 times) draw up tight. * With the plain shuttle thread round
the little finger, 6 D. Begin an oval, with the figured shuttle, 2 R D
(L, 2 R D 3 times) join to the 6th L of last oval, 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5
times) draw tight, and Repeat 10 times from *. Work 6 D, as before, and
Begin the 12th oval, 2 R D (L, 2 R D 3 times) join to the 6th L of last
oval; 2 R D, L, 2 R D join to the 4th L of the 1st oval; 2 R D (L, 2 R D
3 times) draw tight; and fasten off by drawing the fine cotton through
the space near the 1st stitch, and tying.


_To work in the centre._

Take a piece of No. 8 cotton; draw it, in loops, through each of the 12
centre loops of the ovals, and pass the other end of this cotton 3 times
through each loop--fasten off.


_For the foundation of the vandykes._

_Fill the plain shuttle with No. 8_, and measure off 2 lengths of 1 1/2
yards each; tie the 3 ends together. With the 1st length twisted round
the little finger work 2 D, L, 2 D, then put the second round the little
finger, leave a little space, and work 2 R D, L, 2 R D; repeat until
there are 66 Ls on each side. Fasten it neatly into a circle, by untying
the first knot and sewing the threads to each other.


_To unite this strip to the centre-piece._

_1st. Row._ _Fill both shuttles and join._ With the figured shuttle
thread round the little finger make a L with the plain shuttle thread; 3
D join to _any_ L of the strip, 3 D; L, with the plain shuttle thread; 3
D join to the 1st space to the right of the last join. 3 D (L with the
plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next L to the right; 3 D 4 times).
Begin an oval, with the figured shuttle, 3 D join to the next 2 Ls of
the strip; 3 D draw tight; 3 D join to the next L of the strip; 3 D tie
to the last L of plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next L of the
strip; 3 D tie to the last L, but one, of plain shuttle thread (3 D
join to the next L of the strip; 3 D, L, with the plain shuttle thread;
twice); 3 D join to the space, next the last L to which you joined, 3 D.
Repeat this row 6 times, or until all the Ls of the strip have been
joined in.

_In the repetitions, read "the next" instead of "any" in the first
join._

_2nd Row._ Hold the work in the hand, and between each oval continue
working with the figured shuttle thread round the little finger. 3 D, L,
3 D tie to the last L of plain shuttle thread, 3 D. Begin a plain oval
with the figured shuttle, 3 D, L, 3 D draw tight. 3 D tie to the next L
of plain shuttle thread, 3 D. Take the figured shuttle and tie to the L
of the plain oval, leaving about 1/4 inch of cotton. Begin an oval
(close to this tie), 7 D, take the centre circle and join to the space
over any of its ovals; 7 D draw tight. Tie as before to the L of the
plain oval; 3 D tie to the next L of plain shuttle thread, 3 D. Begin a
plain oval, with the figured shuttle; 3 D join to the L of the 1st plain
oval (this will be the 3rd tie in the same L); 3 D draw tight. 3 D tie
to the next plain shuttle L; 3 D, L, 3 D tie to the next plain shuttle
L, 3 D. Begin an oval with the figured shuttle; 3 D join to the next
space (to the right) of the centre piece; 3 D draw tight. 3 D tie to the
next L of plain shuttle thread; and repeat this row 6 times, or until
you have joined to the 12 spaces of the centre circle--fasten off.

[Illustration]


_To unite this Star and the Cornflowers._

_1st Row._ _Fill both shuttles as before, and join the threads._ With
the figured shuttle thread round the little finger. Make a L with the
plain shuttle thread, 3 D; and holding the work so as to fall over the
back of the hand, join to that L of the strip which is the 1st of the
two at the bottom of the vandykes; then join to the 2nd of these two Ls
3 D (L, with the plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next L of the
strip, 3 D 4 times); L with the plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the
space of the strip, next the last L to which you joined, 3 D; L with the
plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next L of the strip 3 D; L with
the plain shuttle thread; 3 D join to the next space of the strip, 3 D
(L with the plain shuttle thread, 3 D join to the next L of the strip, 3
D 4 times), and repeat the row 6 times.

_2nd Row._ Hold the work in the hand, with the figured shuttle thread
round the little finger. Tie to the 1st plain shuttle L; 3 D, L, 3 D tie
to the last plain shuttle L, 3 D. Begin a figured shuttle oval; 3 D,
take a cornflower and join to the 1st L of its 5th row; 3 D draw tight.
With the figured shuttle thread round the little finger; 3 D tie to the
next plain shuttle L, 3 D, L, 3 D tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3 D
join to the 5th L of the last oval of the 1st row of the cornflower; 3 D
tie to the next plain shuttle L (3 D, L 4 times;) 3 D tie to the next
plain shuttle L; 3 D (L, 3 D 6 times) tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3
D (L, 3 D 4 times) tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3 D join to the 3rd
L of the 1st oval of 1st row of the next cornflower; 3 D tie to the next
plain shuttle L, 3 D. L, 3 D, tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3 D.
Begin an oval with the figured shuttle; 3 D join to the last L of the
5th row of this cornflower; 3 D draw tight. With the figured shuttle
thread round the little finger; 3 D tie to the next plain shuttle L; 3
D, L, 3 D tie to the next plain shuttle L, 2 D. Begin a figured shuttle
oval; 9 D join to the centre L of the 5th row of this cornflower; 9 D
draw tight. With the figured shuttle thread round the little finger, 2
D. And repeat 6 times, or until all the cornflowers are joined in--when
the Doyley will be complete.




SECOND DOYLEY.


_Fill the Plain Shuttle with Ardern's crochet cotton No. 8, and the
figured with Evan's Boar's-head No. 18, tie these threads together; Pin
No. 2._


_For the Chrysanthemums._

_1st Circle._ With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger (1
D, L 6 times).

_2nd Circle._ Tie to the 1st L (L, 1 D, L, 1 D tie to the next L 6
times).

_3rd Circle._ (L, 1 D, tie to the next L 12 times.)

_4th Circle._ (L, 1 D. Begin a plain shuttle oval; 4 D draw tight; tie
to the next L 12 times.)

_5th Circle._ (L, 1 D, L, 1 D, and tie in the same Ls as the 4th Circle;
12 times.)

_6th & 7th Circles._ (L, 1 D tie to the next L [or Ls made in the 5th
and 6th circles] 48 times.)

_8th Circle._ (1 D, L 5 times); 1 D attach to the 4th L of the 5th
circle. Attach to the 6th L of the 5th circle (1 R D, L 5 times); 1 R D
(attach to the next L but 1, of the 7th circle, twice). Repeat 6 times
from the beginning of the 8th circle, attaching successively to the 8th
and 10th, 12th and 14th, 16th and 18th, 20th and 22nd, 24th and 2nd,
loops of the 5th circle. Tie together and fasten off. Work 6 similar
chrysanthemums.


_For the intermediate Designs._

_Fill the plain shuttle with No. 8 cotton, and without cutting off from
the skein._--Begin a plain oval; 9 D, L, 9 D draw tight. Work 2 more
similar ovals close to each other. With the skein thread round the
little finger work 1 R D (L, 1 R D 14 times). Begin a looped oval (1 D,
L 15 times); 1 D draw tight and tie round the foundation thread of this
oval. With the skein thread round the little finger (L, 1 R D 8 times).
Begin a 2nd looped oval (1 D, L 5 times); 1 D join to the 10th L of last
oval; 1 D (L, 1 D 7 times) draw tight, and tie as before. With the skein
thread round the little finger (L, 1 R D 10 times); 10 single stitches;
tie to the 2nd L, after the join, of last oval; 20 single stitches tie
to the thread above the 3 plain ovals (1 D, L 14 times), 1 D. Begin a
looped oval (1 R D, L 15 times); 1 R D draw tight, and tie as before.
With the skein thread round the little finger (L, 1 D 8 times). Begin a
looped oval, 1 R D (L, 1 R D 5 times) join to the 10th L of last oval; 1
R D, L, 1 R D join to the space between the 10 and 20 single stitches; 1
R D (L, 1 R D 5 times) draw tight, and tie as before. With the skein
thread round the little finger (L, 1 D 9 times) draw 1 thread through
the L before the beginning of the single stitches, and fasten off. Work
6 similar designs.


_To join the Chrysanthemums and the Designs._

_Fill the figured shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head, No. 18; and do not
sever from the reel._--Taking care to hold the design with the right
side up; tie to the 3rd L of the 1st 9. With the reel cotton round the
little finger, 2 D (L, 2 D 8 times). Begin an oval, 10 D join to the L
before the beginning of the single stitches; 10 D draw tight, and tie
round the foundation thread. With the reel cotton round the little
finger (L, 2 D 9 times) tie to the 3rd L of the 2nd 9 of the design; 2 D
(L, 2 D 4 times), take a chrysanthemum and join to any L of its 7th
circle, not yet joined to; 2 D (L, 2 D 3 times) tie to the 6th L of the
2nd 8 of the design; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) join to the next unjoined L of
the chrysanthemum, to the right; 2 D (L, 2 D 3 times) tie to the 1st L
of the 2nd 8 of the design; 2 D (L, 2 D 8 times). Begin an oval, 8 D
join to the 11th L of the 2nd 14 of the design, 8 D draw tight and tie
as before. With the reel thread round the little finger (L, 2 D 6 times)
attach to the L of the 1st plain oval of the design. Begin an oval, 8 D,
L, 8 D draw tight. Attach to the L of the 3rd oval of the 2nd and in
succession to the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and 1st designs. With the reel
thread round the little finger, work 2 D tie with the reel thread,
successively, to each of the 6 last Ls, working 2 D after each tie.
Begin an oval, 8 D join to the 11th L of the 1st 14 of the last design
joined to; 8 D draw tight and tie as before. Tie with the reel thread to
the next 4 Ls, and work 2 D between each tie; (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to
the 1st L of the 1st 8 of the same design; 2 D (L, 2 D 3 times) join to
the 2nd unjoined L of Chrysanthemum to the right of the last join; 2 D
(L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the 6th L of the 1st 8 of this design; 2 D (L, 2
D 3 times) join to the next unjoined L of Chrysanthemum to the right of
the last join; 2 D (L, 2 D 8 times). Repeat from the beginning 6 times,
or until all the chrysanthemums and designs are joined in, then draw one
thread through the 1st made L and fasten off.


_For the centre-piece of the Second Doyley._

_Fill both the shuttles, and join the threads together._ Begin an oval
with the plain shuttle, close up to the join; work the 2nd single stitch
(L, 1 D 11 times); L work the 1st single stitch, draw up very tight.
With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger, tie to the 1st L
of oval (L, 1 D tie to the next L of the oval 12 times). (Begin an oval
with the plain shuttle; 3 D join to a L of any of the 12 plain ovals of
the Doyley; 3 D draw close. With the plain shuttle thread round the
little finger, 2 D tie to the next L of the last round 12 times), fasten
off, and the Doyley will be complete.

[Illustration]




THIRD DOYLEY.


_Roses for the Third Doyley. Fill the plain shuttle with Ardern's
crochet cotton No. 8. Pin No. 3._

_1st Circle._ Begin an oval 2 D, L, 7 D, L, 7 D, L, 2 D draw close.
(Begin another oval, 2 D join to the last L of the last oval, 7 D, L, 7
D, L, 2 D draw close. Repeat 4 times.) Begin another oval 2 D, join to
the last L of the last oval, 7 D, L, 7 D join to the first L of the
first oval, 2 D draw close.

_2nd Circle._ Tie to the foundation thread of the first oval of the
first circle. Begin an oval 2 D, L, 10 D, L, 2 D draw close. (Tie to the
foundation thread of the next oval of the first circle. Begin an oval, 2
D join to the last L of the last oval, 10 D, L, 2 D draw close, and
repeat 4 times.) Tie to the foundation thread of the next oval of the
first circle. Begin an oval, 2 D join to the last L of the last oval, 10
D join to the 1st L of the 1st oval of the 2nd circle, 2 D draw close.

_3rd Circle._ Tie to the foundation thread of the first oval of the 2nd
circle. Begin an oval, 2 D, L, 6 D, L, 2 D draw close. (Tie to the
foundation thread of the next oval of the 2nd circle. Begin an oval, 2 D
join to the last L of the last oval, 6 D, L, 2 D draw close and repeat 4
times.) Tie to the foundation thread of the next oval of the 2nd
circle. Begin an oval, 2 D join to the last L of the last oval, 6 D join
to the 1st L of the 1st oval of the 3rd circle, 2 D draw close.

_4th Circle._ Begin an oval at a little distance, 1 D join to the
foundation thread of the 1st, and in succession to the 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
5th, and 6th ovals of the 3rd circle, and work 1 D after each join, draw
close and fasten off.

Work 12 similar Roses for this Doyley.


_For the Centre. Fill the figured shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head No.
18, and Pin No. 2._

_1st Row._ Begin an oval, 3 D, L, 3 D draw close, and work 12 similar
ovals, leaving 1/2 an inch of cotton between each. Tie the threads
together and fasten off.

_2nd Row._ Measure off 1/2 a yard of cotton from the shuttle, twist it
round the little finger, and work 1 D. (Put this 1/2 yard round the
space of cotton between two of the ovals of the 1st Row, 1 D repeat 12
times), fasten off.

_3rd Row._ _Refil the plain shuttle, and tie to the figured._ (Begin a
plain shuttle L, 5 D join to the L of any of the ovals of the 1st Row, 5
D draw close. With the figured shuttle thread on the little finger (L, 2
D 5 times) repeat 12 times) tie to the foundation thread of the 1st
oval.

_4th Row._ With the plain shuttle thread on the little finger (1 D, L 14
times). [Begin a figured shuttle oval, 4 R D (L, 2 R D 9 times) join to
the L over the next plain shuttle oval (to the right) of the 3rd Row (2
R D, L 9 times), 4 R D draw close. With the plain shuttle thread on the
little finger (L, 1 D 14 times) tie to the L over the next plain shuttle
oval to the right. _For the leaves, take Pin No. 3._ (1 D, L 3 times) 4
D, 1st L, 2 D join to the 8th L of the last 14, 2 D join to the 6th L of
the last 14, 4 D, L, 4 D tie to the foundation thread under the 1st L of
the leaf. Begin a figured shuttle oval, 3 D, L, 3 D draw close. With the
plain shuttle thread on the little finger, 4 D, 2nd L, 4 D join to the
last L before the figured shuttle oval, 4 D, L, 2 D, L, 2 D tie to the
foundation thread under the 2nd L, 2 D join to the last L, 5 D, L, 1 D,
L, 5 D, L, 2 D tie to the space of foundation cotton after the last tie,
2 D join to the last L; 2 D, L, 4 D, L, 4 D tie to the space after last
tie, 4 D. Begin a figured shuttle oval, 3 D join to the L of the last
figured shuttle oval, 3 D draw close. With the plain shuttle thread on
the little finger, 4 D join to the last L, 4 D, * L, 2 D, L, 2 D tie to
the foundation thread by the last figured shuttle oval, 4 D join to the
3rd of the 1st 3 Ls of the leaf; 1 D join to the 2nd of the 1st 3 Ls, 1
D join to the 1st of the 1st 3 Ls, 1 D tie to the L over the plain
shuttle oval as before. _Pin No. 2_, 1 D (L, 1 D 6 times) join to the
last L made; 1 D, (L, 1 D twice) join to the last made L but one; 1 D
(L, 1 D 4 times) and repeat 6 times.] In working it for the 6th time, it
will be necessary to work from the asterisk thus. Join to the 10th L of
the 1st 14, 2 D join to the 7th L of the 1st 14, 2 D tie to the
foundation thread by the figured shuttle oval, 4 D join to the 3rd of
the 1st 3 Ls of the leaf 1 D join to the 2nd of the 1st 3 Ls, 1 D join
to the 1st of the 1st 3 Ls, 1 D tie together and fasten off.


_To join in the Roses. Fill the figured shuttle and do not cut off from
the reel._

_1st Row._ With the reel thread round the little finger, L, with the
shuttle thread, 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) L, with the shuttle thread, 2 D (L,
2 D twice) join to the 1st L of the four at the top of the leaves of the
centre-piece, holding it over the back of the hand, the right side up: 2
D, L, 2 D; L with the shuttle thread; 2 D, L, 2 D join to the 2nd L of
the 4 at the top of this leaf; then join to the 3rd L of the same 4;
leave the foundation thread rather loose; 2 D, L, 2 D, L with the
shuttle thread; 2 D, L, 2 D; join to the last L of the same 4; 2 D (L, 2
D twice). (L with the shuttle thread; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) twice.) Begin
an oval; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) join to the L over the large figured
shuttle oval of 4th Row; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) draw close. With the reel
thread round the little finger; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) repeat this row 6
times, joining successively to all the leaves of the centre-piece.

_2nd Row._ Turn the work so as to hold it in the hand; (L, 2 D 5 times)
take a rose and [join to the L at the point of one of its 1st circle of
ovals; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the last shuttle L; 2 D (L, 2 D 4
times) tie to the next shuttle L; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times). Begin an oval;
2 D, L, 2 D join to the L of the next oval to the right of the same
rose; 2 D (L, 2 D 5 times). Take another rose and join to the L of one
of its ovals of the 1st circle; 2 D, L, 2 D draw close. With the reel
thread round the little finger; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) join to the same
shuttle L as last time; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the next shuttle L;
2 D, L, 2 D join to the L of the next oval of the same rose; 2 D tie to
the foundation thread _before_ the two joins of the last row, to the
point of the leaf; 2 D (L, 2 D twice) tie to the foundation thread
_after_ the same two joins; 2 D join to the L of the next oval of the
same rose; 2 D, L, 2 D (tie to the next shuttle L; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times)
twice.) Begin an oval; 2 D (L, 2 D twice) join to the L of the next oval
of the same rose; 2 D (L, 2 D 5 times) join to the L of another rose; 2
D (L, 2 D twice) draw close. 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the same
shuttle L as before; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) tie to the next shuttle L; * 2
D (L, 2 D 4 times) repeat 6 times.] The last time this is repeated,
finish at the asterisk, by tying to the 1st L of the row, and fastening
off. All the roses being joined in, the Doyley will be complete.




EDGING No. 1.

[Illustration]

    _This edging may be worked either in Ardern's crochet
         cotton No. 8, and Evan's Boar's-head No. 18. Which
         will make it about an inch deep,--and with Pin No.
         2._

    _Or in Evan's Boar's-head No. 18 and No. 30--Pin No. 3.
         In either case the plain shuttle must be filled
         with the coarser, and the figured with the finer
         cotton._


_1st Row._ Unite the two threads, begin an oval with the figured
shuttle; 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5 times) draw tight. With the plain shuttle
thread round the little finger; 2 D. Begin the 1st plain shuttle oval; 2
D (L, 2 D 3 times) draw tight. With the plain shuttle thread work; 4 D.
Begin the 2nd plain shuttle oval; 2 D join to the 3rd L of the 1st oval;
2 D (L, 2 D twice) draw tight. With plain shuttle thread, 2 D.

[Begin a figured shuttle oval; 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5 times) draw tight. With
the plain shuttle thread on the little finger 2 D. Begin a plain
shuttle oval; 2 D join to the last L of last plain shuttle oval; 2 D (L,
2 D twice) draw tight. With the plain shuttle thread, 4 D. Begin a plain
shuttle oval; 2 D join to the 3rd L of last oval; 2 D (L, 2 D twice)
draw tight. With the plain shuttle thread, 2 D--repeat twice.] Work
another figured shuttle oval. With the figured shuttle thread, on the
little finger, 2 R D (L, 2 R D 3 times). Begin a plain shuttle oval; 3 D
join to the 3rd L of the last plain shuttle oval; 1 D, L, 3 D draw
tight. With the figured shuttle thread (L, 2 R D 4 times).

To continue the pattern repeat what is between the brackets 3 times
instead of twice, and finish each pattern as in the 1st.

_2nd Row, or Foundation._ Begin an oval with the figured shuttle 2 D;
join to the centre L of the 1st figured shuttle oval; 2 D join to the
centre L of the 2nd figured shuttle oval; 2 D join to the centre L of
the 3rd figured shuttle oval; 2 D join to the centre L of the 4th oval;
draw up, but not quite tight. Tie to the 4th figured cotton L, leaving
rather more than 1/2 an inch of cotton, and begin the next oval at a
similar distance from the tie--repeat until the length worked is
finished.




EDGING No. 2.

[Illustration]


_Fill the plain shuttle with Ardern's crochet cotton No. 12. Pin No. 2._

_1st Row._ Work a sufficient length of ovals; 3 D (L, 3 D twice) not
drawn up quite close, and leaving 1/2 an inch of cotton, or more,
between each.


_Fill the figured shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head No. 20, and refil the
plain shuttle; tie the cottons together._

_2nd Row._ With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger; L, 2
D, L, 1 D tie to the 1st L of 1st oval; 1 D (L, 2 D twice); L, 1 D tie
to the 2nd L of the 1st oval; 1 D, L, 2 D tie to the thread between the
ovals. Repeat till all the ovals are finished.

_3rd Row._ Begin again by tying in the 1st L of last Row. With the plain
shuttle thread round the little finger; L, 1 D tie to the next L of the
2nd Row; (1 D, L, 1 D tie to the next L of the 2nd row twice;) 1 D, L, 1
D, tie to the same L; [1 D, L, 1 D tie to the next L of the 2nd Row
twice] 1 D, tie to the next L of 2nd Row, and repeat to the end of the
strip. Or this row may be worked without loops--if they are objected to.

_To make a strong foundation for this edging. Take the plain shuttle,
and tie to the foundation cotton of the ovals, twice, between each oval;
or on either side of the ties in the 2nd Row._




EDGING No. 3.

[Illustration]

      _Fill the shuttles with the same cottons as in the
          1st Edging, and use the same pins. The coarser
          sizes will make this edging an inch and a half
          deep. Tie the cottons together._


Begin an oval with the plain shuttle; 3 D, L, 3 D draw tight. With the
plain shuttle thread work 4 D.

Begin a looped oval with the plain shuttle; 2 D (L, 2 D 5 times) draw
very tight.

_The Leaf._ Begin a figured shuttle oval; 2 R D (L, 2 R D 5 times) join
to the 3rd L of the last row of the Rosette; 2 R D (L, 2 R D 14 times)
draw tight. At a little distance begin a plain oval with the figured
shuttle; 3 D join to the thread of the Leaf under the join; 3 D draw
close. Begin a plain oval with the figured shuttle quite close to the
last; 3 D join to the thread under the 9th L of the 14 of the Leaf; 3 D
draw tight. Tie round the foundation thread of the two plain ovals, and
leaving a short space of cotton, tie between the 4th and 5th Ls of the
14 of the Leaf; tie again below the plain ovals and round the foundation
thread of the leaf.

[With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger, 4 D. Begin a
plain shuttle oval, 3 D; L, 3 D draw close. Work a similar figured
shuttle oval, and tie round its foundation thread. Repeat twice.] With
the plain shuttle thread, 4 D.

_The Rosette._ Leave a space of each cotton. Begin a figured shuttle
oval, 1 D (L, 1 D 7 times) draw close. With the plain shuttle thread (L,
1 D 7 times). [Begin a figured shuttle oval, 1 D (L, 1 D 3 times) join
to the centre L of last oval; 1 D (L, 1 D 3 times) draw tight. With the
plain shuttle thread (L, 1 D 7 times). Repeat 3 times.] Tie to the
foundation thread of the 1st of these ovals. Tie to the 1st L of the 1st
7. With the plain shuttle thread round the little finger (L, 1 D tie to
the next L but one 11 times). Tie with the plain shuttle thread to the
15th L of the leaf; 1 D tie to the next L but one. Tie with the plain
shuttle thread to the L of the 1st figured shuttle oval; 1 D tie to the
next L but one. Tie with the plain shuttle thread to the L of the 2nd
figured shuttle oval; 1 D tie to the next L but one, [4 D. Begin a plain
shuttle oval, 3 D, L, 3 D draw tight. Begin a figured shuttle oval, 3 D
join to the 1st L of the last round of the Rosette; 3 D draw tight and
tie to its foundation thread. Repeat once, joining the figured shuttle
oval to the 2nd L of the Rosette,] 4 D. Repeat to the required length,
beginning with the looped oval.

_For the Foundation._ Tie the threads together in the L of the 1st plain
shuttle oval, holding the work in the hand and the right side up. With
the plain shuttle thread round the little finger (L, 1 D, 4 times) tie
in the 3rd L of the next oval, (L, 1 D, 4 times) tie in the L of the
next oval, [(L, 1 D, 3 times) tie in the L of the next oval. Repeat 3
times.] Repeat from the beginning till all the ovals are finished.




EDGING No. 4.

[Illustration]


_Fill the plain shuttle with Evan's Boar's-head No. 18, and the figured
with No. 30. Tie these threads together, Pin No. 3._

_1st Leaf, 1st Row._ With the plain shuttle thread round the little
finger (L, 1 D 10 times) tie to the 9th L (L, 1 R D tie to the next L 8
times), 1 R D attach to the foundation thread under the 1st L, 2 D (L, 2
D 4 times).

_2nd Leaf, 1st Row._ (L, 1 D 9 times) tie with the plain shuttle thread
to the 5th L (counting from the point) of the last Leaf. Turn the work,
1 R D tie to the 9th L (L, 1 R D tie to the next L 8 times) 1 R D attach
to the foundation thread under the 1st L; 2 D (L, 2 D 4 times). Repeat
the 2nd Leaf till a sufficient length is worked.

_2nd Row._ Tie to the foundation thread of the 1st Leaf of the 1st Row,
and tie the threads together. [With the plain shuttle thread round the
little finger 9 D. Begin a figured shuttle oval, 5 R D join to the 2
centre Ls of the four Ls; 5 R D draw close. With the plain shuttle
thread 9 D tie to the foundation thread of the 2nd Leaf under the 1st L,
and repeat.]

_3rd Row._ Refil the shuttles and tie the threads together in the space
under the last made oval; [2 D (L, 2 D 4 times) join to the space under
the next oval. Repeat to the end of the work.]




INSERTION No. 1.

[Illustration: _For the Strip._]


_Fill two plain shuttles and a figured one. With Ardern's crochet cotton
No. 12. Pin No. 1._

Tie these 3 threads together. With the thread of the 1st plain shuttle
round the little finger, and always working with the figured shuttle. 2
D, L, 2 D turn these stitches under the thumb, with the thread of the
2nd plain shuttle round the little finger; 2 R D, L, 2 R D, repeat until
you have twice the length you will require of insertion.


_Refil a plain shuttle and the figured; tie the threads together. Pin
No. 2._

Holding the right side of this strip upwards, tie to the 1st L: [with
the plain shuttle thread round the little finger (L, 1 R D 9 times) turn
the work. Begin a figured shuttle oval; (4 D join to the next L on the
same side of the strip twice;) 3 D join to the next L; 2 D join to the
next L; 3 D (join to the next L; 4 D twice) draw close. Tie to the
foundation thread of this oval. Turn the work; with the plain shuttle
thread on the little finger; (L, 1 R D 9 times) tie to the next L on the
same side of the strip--repeat to the end of the strip.]

Work the same way on the opposite side, beginning by tying to the L
above the centre of the last made oval.




INSERTION No. 2.

[Illustration]


  _Fill two plain shuttles, and one figured with Evan's Boar's-head
                        No. 28. Pin No. 3._

Work a similar strip to that in the 1st insertion.

Refil one shuttle. Hold the strip on the right side.

_1st Oval._ Begin an oval; 1 D (L, 1 D 4 times) join to the 1st L of the
strip; 1 D (L, 1 D 4 times) draw tight.

_2nd Oval._ Begin a second oval at a little distance; 1 R D (L, 1 R D 4
times) join to the last L on the same side of the strip, having turned
it; 1 R D (L, 1 R D 4 times) draw tight.

Repeat these two ovals, joining to the successive Ls on either side till
all are joined.




AN IMITATION GYMP.


_Work the strip of the 1st insertion in Brook's No. 8 crochet cotton.
Pin No. 1. It may also be worked, in black, in coarse purse silk._




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note:

This text uses both corn-flowers and cornflowers.

Title page, full-stop changed to a comma (FARRINGDON STREET, AND)

Page 17, fullstop changed to comma after 4 D (finger, 4 D, 2nd L)

Page 17, "L's" changed to "Ls" to conform to majority of text (3 Ls of
the leaf)

Page 18, "L's" changed to "Ls" to conform to majority of text (the 1st 3
Ls, 1 D)

Page 25, "L's" changed to "Ls" to conform to majority of text (the 4th
and 5th Ls of)

